#### Command Line Substitution
The shell performs various command line substitutions when parsing command line. For example, the shell substitutes file name wildcards with the expanded list of file names.

Variables are assigned using the following syntax `variable=value`. Note, there are no spaces in the assignment statement. They can be used by prefixing the `$` sign as follows `$variable`.

The program `expr` can be used to perform arithmetic operations.

The backquote (\`) character can be used to invoke substitution such that whatever is inside backquotes is interpreted as a command and is executed, its output is captured, and it is then substituted into the command line.

For example -
```bash
$ i=1
$ echo $i
1
$ i=`expr $i + 1`
$ echo $i
2
```

- Special Variables
	- The special variable `?` stores the exit status of the last command. `0` indicates success and everything else failure.
	- The special variable `#` stores the number of command line arguments.
	- The special variable `*` expands to all arguments.
 
---
#### Control Flow
The command `test` can be used to compare two values. (Refer to [[1. The UNIX Command Line]])

##### If Statement
```bash
if test $? -eq 0
then
	echo Previous Command Succeded
else
	echo Previous Command Failed
fi
```

`:` acts as a null statement and can be used in the then clause when it needs to be empty, since it requires at least one statement.

##### While Loop
```bash
i=0
while test $i -lt 10
do
	i=`expr $i + 1`
	echo $i
done
```

##### For Loop
```bash
for i in `seq 1 4`
do
	echo String_$i
done
```

##### Switch Case
```bash
i=text1
case $i in
	text1)
		echo 1
		;;
	text2)
		echo 2
		;;
	*)
		echo This is the default case
		;;
esac
```
Note - The case names are in glob notation, so the `*` matches everything and hence acts as the default case

---
#### Quoting
- Single Quotes
	- Suppresses the interpretation of all special characters except,
	- the closing single quote
- Double Quotes
	- Suppresses the interpretation of all special characters except,
	- dollar sign
	- backquote
	- backslash
	- the closing double quote

---
#### I/O Redirection 
#todo 

---
