#### Files
The unix system calls to manage files are `open`, `read`, `write`, `close`. However, these are OS-dependent. For this reason, the `stdio` library is used for file access in C. `FILE` is an abstract data type declared in `stdio.h`. It is portable to non-unix operating systems and supports buffering.
##### Buffering
It is slow to perform a system call for little pieces of data. The `stdio` library reads a large amount of data even if has not been called for yet, and saves the excess data in a buffer until it is called for later. Similarly, when writing data, it saves a large amount of data. This is so that the system calls need to be called less often.
##### Library Calls for IO

###### `getchar`
- Reads one byte from the standard input.
- Returns an `int` from `0` to the maximum unsigned byte value.
- Returns `-1` to indicate end of file.
- Syntax - `getchar();`
###### `getc`
- Identical to `getchar` except accepts a pointer to the file to read from.
- Syntax - `getc(FILE*);`
###### `putchar`
- Outputs one byte to the standard output.
- Returns the byte outputted on success.
- Returns `EOF` on failure
- Syntax - `putchar(byte);`
###### `putc`
- Identical to `putchar` except accepts a pointer to the file to output to.
- Syntax - `putc(byte, FILE*);`
###### `fopen`
- Opens files.
- The first parameter is the file path name, both absolute or relative.
- The second parameter indicates the file mode -
	- read (`"r"`)
		- Fails if the file does not exist.
	- write (`"w"`)
		- Does not fail even if the file does not exist.
		- Fails if a file is read-only.
- Returns a pointer to `FILE`.
- Returns a null pointer if it fails.
- Stashes a code explaining why it failed, if it fails. However, the file name isn't stored.
- Syntax - `fopen(path, mode);`

Usage Example
```c
File *fp;
if ((fp == fopen("file", "r")) == NULL) {
	perror("file");  // Outputs to standard error
	return(1);  // Returning a non-zero integer indicates an error
}
return(0);
```
###### `fclose`
- Closes a file. Needs to be called explicitly to make sure changes have been written to the file and are not in the buffer.
- Returns `0` if it succeeds.
- Returns `-1` if it fails.
- Stashes a code explaining why it failed, if it fails.
- Syntax - `fclose(FILE*);`
###### `perror`
- Outputs to standard error.
- It does not return anything.
- Syntax - `perror(errorMessage);`

###### `fprintf`
- Identical to `printf` except accepts a pointer to the file to output to.
- Returns the number of characters written on success.
- Returns a negative number on failure.
- Syntax - `fprintf(FILE*, "...");`
###### `fscanf`
- Identical to `scanf` except accepts a pointer to the file to read.
- Returns the number of input items successfully matched and assigned on success.
- Returns `0` of failure.
- Syntax - `fscanf(FILE*, "...");`

###### `sscanf`
- Identical to `scanf` except reads a string instead of the standard input.
- [Helpful Video](https://www.teach.cs.toronto.edu/~ajr/209/video/files06.html)
- Syntax - `sscanf(str, "...");`
###### `fgets`
- Reads an entire line of a file as opposed to a single character.
- The first parameter is the array to store the string in.
- The second parameter is the length of the array.
- The third parameter is the pointer to the file to read.
- It always results in a valid, correctly terminated string. If the array length were exceeded, it would read one less character than the length of the array and add a null terminator.
- Returns the string on success.
- Returns the null pointer on failure.
- Syntax - `fgets(array, arrayLength, FILE*);`
Dealing with newline (`\n`)
```c
char str[50]; char *p;
fgets(str, 50, stdin);
if((p = strchr(str, '\n'))) *p = '\0';
```
##### `printf` and `scanf`
#todo 
##### Note
`EOF` is defined as `-1` in `stdio.h`.
There is a limit on how many files can be open at a time.
`stdin`, `stdout`, and `stderr` can be used as parameters for `getc` and `putc` and refer to the standard input, standard output, and standard error respectively.

---
#### Strings
Strings are `char` arrays with a special null character to mark the end of the text. It is `\0`.

String literals are strings that cannot be changed. They are initialised as -
`char *text = 'hello';`

String variables are initialised as - `char text[] = 'hello';` The size of the `char` array when a string is initialised like this is equal to one more than the number of characters. This additional index is for the null terminator.

`string.h` contains all the C string functions.
##### Library Calls for Strings
###### `strlen`
- Returns the number of characters in a string, excluding the null terminator.
- Syntax - `strlen(array);`
###### `strcopy`
- Copies the characters from one string to another, overwriting it.
- The first parameter is the array/string to which the characters are copied. It doesn't need to be a string since it will be overwritten anyways.
- The second parameter is the string that is copied.
- Returns the pointer to the string that is copied to.
- This is an unsafe function since the compiler may not raise an error even if the array being copied to is not of sufficient length, leading to undefined behaviour.
- Syntax - `strcopy(str1, str2);`
###### `strncopy`
- This is similar to `strcopy` except that it requires a third parameter, an `int`, that specifies the maximum number of characters to copy.
- However, this is still unsafe since it does not add a null terminator if it is not in the first specified number of characters of the string.
- A null terminator should be explicitly added.
- Syntax - `strncopy(str1, str2, numCharacters);`

Safe usage 
```c
strncopy(str1, str2, sizeof(str1));
str1[sizeof(str1) - 1] = '\0';
```
###### `strcat`
- Concatenates two strings. I.e., adds one string to the end of another string.
- The first parameter is the string to the end which the second parameter is added.
- Returns a pointer to the first parameter.
- It starts at the location of the first null terminator hence, both parameters must be strings prior to strcat being called.
- This is also an unsafe function since it does not check if the array being copied to has sufficient space.
- Syntax - `strcat(str1, str2);`
###### `strncat`
- This is similar to `strcat` except that it requires a third parameter, an `int`, that specifies the maximum number of characters to copy.
- Unlike `strncopy`, `strncat` always adds the null terminator to the end of the string.
- Syntax - `strncopy(str1, str2, numCharacters);`
- Safe Usage - `strncat(str1, str2, sizeof(str1) - sizeof(str2) - 1);`
###### `strchr`
- Searches for the first occurrence of a character in a string from left to right .
- The first parameter is the string to search.
- The second parameter is the character to search for in the string.
- Returns the pointer to the character if it was found.
- Returns the null pointer if the character was not found.
- Syntax - `strchar(string, character);`
###### `strstr`
- Searches for the first occurrence of a substring in a string from left to right .
- The first parameter is the string to search.
- The second parameter is the substring to search for in the string.
- Returns the pointer to the first character of the substring if it was found.
- Returns the null pointer if the substring was not found.
- Syntax - `strstr(string, substring);`

##### Dynamic Allocation of Strings
Since `sizeof(char)` is guaranteed to by `1`, memory can be allocated for a string consisting of `n` characters by `char *string = (char *) malloc(n + 1);`. An extra byte is required for the null terminator.

Read more about `malloc` in [[6. Dynamic Memory Allocation]]

---
