#### Terminology
- Program - Programs are the executable instructions of a program; either source code or compiled code.
- Process - Processes are the running instance of a program. A process includes the machine code and information about the current state of the process such as current values of variables.
---
#### Memory Structure
- Program Code
- Globals - Holds the values of global variables.
- Heap - Holds the values of `malloc`'d variables .
- Stack - Holds the values of current local variables of the function(s) being executed.
- Operating System
	-  Process Control Block - A data structure that stores additional information about the state of a process
		- PID - Process ID (a unique identifier of the process)
		- PPID - Parent PID (PID of the parent process)
		- PGID - Process Group ID - Unique ID of the process group
		- SID - Session ID
		- Program Counter - Identifies the next instruction to be executed 
		- Stack Pointer - Identifies the top of the stack
		- Open File Table
		- Signal Table - Pointer to code to handle a signal
		- Other things that the OS manages
---
#### Process States
The number of CPUs determines how many processes can execute instructions at a time. The scheduler determines which process should be run and when.

- Running State - Processes that are executing instructions simultaneously.
- Ready State -  Processes that are ready and would be executing instructions if a CPU were available.
- Blocked State - Processes that are waiting for an event to occur. They are in a blocked or sleeping state.
---
#### Creating Processes
Processes can be created using the `fork` system call. This is done by duplicating the process calling `fork`. The operating system duplicates a process by copying its address space, data, and process control block. The child process is almost identical to its parent, differing only in its PID, its Parent PID, and the return value of `fork`. 

Upon successful completion, `fork` returns a value of `0` to the child process and returns the process ID of the child process to the parent process.  Otherwise, a value of `-1` is returned to the parent process, no child process is created, and the global variable `errno` is set to indicate the error.

The child process has the same value for the program counter as the original process, so when the child process runs, it starts executing just after fork returns. However, when the operating system is finished creating the new process, control can be returned to either the parent *or* the child. 

The parent and child processes are now completely separate processes and don't share memory.

Refer to `man fork` for more details.

---
#### Parent-Child Relationship and Termination
A parent process can terminate before its child process(es). 

The `wait` system call can be used to suspend the execution of the parent process until one of its child processes has terminated. It has one parameter (`int *stat_loc`), a pointer to an `int`. On return from a successful `wait` call, the parameter contains termination information about the process that exited.

The termination information consists of two parts
- The lowest 8 bits indicate whether the child process terminated normally, or whether it terminated because it received a signal. If it terminated due to a signal, the lower 8 bits indicate which signal.
- The next `8` bits contain the exit status.

Macros defined in `sys/wait.h` can be used to extract this information
- `WIFEXITED(status)` - True if the process terminated normally by a call to `exit`.
- `WEXITSTATUS(status)` -  If `WIFEXITED(status)` is true, evaluates to the low-order 8 bits of the argument passed to `exit` by the child.
- `WIFSIGNALED(status)` - True if the process terminated due to receipt of a signal.
- `WTERMSIG(status)` - If `WIFSIGNALED(status)` is true, evaluates to the number of the signal that caused the termination of the process.

If `wait` returns due to a stopped or terminated child process, the process ID of the child is returned to the calling process.  Otherwise, a value of `-1` is returned and `errno` is set to indicate the error.

The `wait` system call will fail and return immediately if the calling process has no existing unwaited-for child processes and `errno` will be set to `ECHILD`.

Refer to `man 2 wait` for more details.

##### Zombie and Orphan Processes
A zombie process is a process that has terminated but still has an entry in the process table. The operating system can't delete the process control block of a terminated process until it knows it is safe to clean it up. Hence, it is only deleted once  `wait` is called and its termination status is collected.

An orphan process is a process that is still executing but whose parent process has terminated. The parent PID of an orphan process is `1`, which is the PID of the `init` process. This is because orphan processes are adopted by the `init` process. The `init` process calls `wait` in a loop, hence terminating the processes it adopts.

If the parent process of a child process terminates without calling `wait` and collecting the child's termination status, the child process becomes an orphan. It is then adopted by the `init` process, which calls `wait` and terminates it.

---
#### Executing Programs - `execv` and the `exec` family
`execve` transforms the calling process into a new process. Its prototype is 
`int execve(const char *path, char *const argv[], char *const envp[]);`

The new process is constructed from an ordinary file, whose name is pointed to by `path`, called the new process file. This file is either an executable object file, or a file of data for an interpreter. The system tells whether a file contains a program by looking at its first two bytes or so. If these contain a special value called the magic number, then the system treats the file as a program.

The argument `argv` is a pointer to a **null-terminated** array of character pointers to null-terminated character strings. These strings construct the argument list to be made available to the new process. At least one argument must be present in the array; by custom, the first element should be the name of the executed program (for example, the last component of path).

The argument `envp` is also a pointer to a null-terminated array of character pointers to null-terminated strings. A pointer to this array is normally stored in the global variable environ. These strings pass information to the new process that is not directly an argument to the command.

As the `execve` function overlays the current process image  with a new process image, the successful call has no process to return to.  If `execve` does return to the calling process, an error has occurred; the return value will be `-1` and the global variable `errno` is set to indicate the error.

The PID and the parent PID of the process remain the same.

The `exec` family of functions replaces the current process image with a new process image. The functions are front-ends for the function `execve`.

Refer to `man 3 exec` and `man execve` for more details

---
#### Terminating Processes
`exit` is used to terminate a process, although a process will also stop when it runs out of program by reaching the end of the main function, or when main executes a return statement.

The single, integer argument to exit is called the process' exit status. It is normally used to indicate the success or failure of the task performed by the process. By convention a process returns zero on normal termination, some non-zero value if something has gone wrong.

A call to `exit` flushes all open output streams closes all open file descriptors. `exit` will also call any programmer-defined exit handling routines and perform what are generally described as clean-up actions. A programmer can also set at least 32 exit handling routines with the `atexit` function. Each of the exit handling functions recorded by `atexit` will be called on exit in the reverse order to which they were set.

`exit` does nothing to prevent bottomless recursion should a function registered using `atexit` itself call `exit`.  Such functions must call `_exit` instead.

---
#### Files
Every process expects three files to be open, those on file descriptors `0`, `1` and `2`. By default, these correspond to the standard input, standard output, and standard error.

We can redirect where processes take their input from or output to by opening files on file descriptors `0` and `1` respectively.

A successful `open` always gives us the lowest available file descriptor number. If file descriptors `0`, `1`, and `2` are open, and we call `open` successfully, it will give us file descriptor `3`. However, if we close file descriptor `1` before calling `open`, so that the open file descriptors are now only `0` and `2`, then a successful `open` will return `1`, because that's the lowest available file descriptor number. So, the file will be open on file descriptor `1`.

Files kept open across a call to fork remain intimately connected in child and parent. This is because the read-write pointer for each file is shared between the child and the parent. This is possible because the read-write pointer is maintained by the system; it is not embedded explicitly within the process itself. Consequently, when a child process moves forward in a file, the parent process will also find itself at the new position.

##### `dup2`
`dup2` accepts `2` file descriptors as parameters. If both are equal, then just `dup2` returns the second file descriptor. Otherwise, it duplicates the first file descriptor. If the second file descriptor is already in use, it is first deallocated as if a `close` call had been done first. However, it does not close the first file descriptor.
```c
// Redirecting a file to standard input
int fd = open("file", O_RDONLY);
dup2(fd, 0);
close(fd);
```
##### `fcntl`
The `fcntl` function can be used for controlling file descriptors.

Refer to `man fcntl` for more details.

##### `read`
The prototype of `read` is `ssize_tread(int fildes, void *buf, size_t nbyte);`
`read` attempts to read `nbyte` bytes of data from the object referenced by the descriptor `fildes` into the buffer pointed to by `buf`. 

On objects capable of seeking, the `read` starts at a position given by the pointer associated with `fildes` (refer to `man 2 lssek`). Upon return from `read`, the pointer is incremented by the number of bytes actually read. Objects that are not capable of seeking always read from the current position.  The value of the pointer associated with such an object is undefined.

The system guarantees to read the number of bytes requested if the descriptor references a normal file that has that many bytes left before the end-of-file, but in no other case. `read` will fail if the parameter `nbyte` exceeds `INT_MAX`, and it will not attempt a partial read. Upon successful completion, `read` returns the number of bytes actually read and placed in the buffer. Upon reading end-of-file, `0` is returned.  Otherwise, a `-1` is returned and the global variable errno is set to indicate the error. `ssize_t` is signed `size_t`.

##### `write`
The prototype of `write` is `ssize_t write(int fildes, const void *buf, size_t nbyte);`
`write` attempts to write `nbyte` bytes of data to the object referenced by the descriptor `fildes` from the buffer pointed to by `buf`.

On objects capable of seeking, the `write` starts at a position given by the pointer associated with `fildes` (refer to `man 2 lseek`). Upon return from `write`, the pointer is incremented by the number of bytes which were written. Objects that are not capable of seeking always write from the current position. The value of the pointer associated with such an object is undefined.

When using non-blocking I/O on objects, such as sockets (refer to [[8. Inter-Process Communication]]), that are subject to flow control, `write` and may write fewer bytes than requested. `write` will fail if the parameter `nbyte` exceeds `INT_MAX`, and it will not attempt a partial write. Upon successful completion the number of bytes which were written is returned. Otherwise, a `-1` is returned and the global variable errno is set to indicate the error.

---
#### Sample Code
##### `fork` and `wait`
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <signal.h>

int main() {
	int result;
	int i, j;
	
	printf("[%d] Original Process\n", getpid());

	for(i = 0; i < 5; i++){
		if((result = fork()) == -1) {  // Fork failed
			perror("wait");
			exit(0);  // Terminate parent process
		} else if(result == 0) {  // Child process 
			for(j = 0; j < 5; j++) {
				printf("[%d] Child %d, %d\n", getpid(), i, j);
				usleep(100);  // Suspend thread execution
			}
			exit(0);  // Terminate child process
		}
	}

	for(i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
		pid_t pid;
		int status;
		if( (pid = wait(&status)) == -1 ) {
			perror("wait");
		} else {
			printf("Child %d terminated with %d\n", pid, status);
		}
	}

	printf("[%d] Parent about to terminate\n", getpid());
	return(0);
}
```
---
##### `execl`
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int main()
{
    execl("/bin/cat", "cat", "a wacky file name illustrating that each of these is an argument without reparsing", (char *)NULL);
    perror("/bin/cat");
    return(1);
}
```
---
##### `execve`
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>

int main()
{
    char *x[3];
    extern char **environ;

    x[0] = "cat";
    x[1] = "a wacky file name illustrating that each of these is an argument without parsing";
    x[2] = NULL;
    execve("/bin/cat", x, environ);
    perror("/bin/cat");
    return(1);
}
```
---
##### `fork`, `exec`, and `wait`
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>

int main()
{
    int x = fork();
    if (x == -1) {
        perror("fork");
        return(1);
    } else if (x == 0) {
        /* child */
        execl("/bin/ls", "ls", (char *)NULL);
        perror("/bin/ls");
        return(1);
    } else {
        /* parent */
        int status, pid;
        pid = wait(&status);
        printf("pid %d exit status %d\n", pid, WEXITSTATUS(status));
        return(0);
    }
}
```
---
##### Approximating `system`
```c
#include <unistd.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <stdio.h>
#include <sys/wait.h>

int docommand(char *command) {
	pid_t pid;
	if((pid = fork()) < 0) {
		perror("fork");
		return(-1);
	} else if (pid == 0) {
		execl("/bin/sh", "sh", "-c", command, (char *) 0);
		perror("execl");
		exit(1);
	} else {
		wait((int *) 0);
		return(0);
	}
}

int main() {
	char command[3] = "ls\0";
	return(docommand(command));
}
```
---
