#### Pipes
The `pipe` function creates a pipe (an object that allows unidirectional data flow) and allocates a pair of file descriptors. The first descriptor connects to the read end of the pipe; the second connects to the write end.

The prototype of `pipe` is `int pipe(int fildes[2]);`
Data written to `fildes[1]` appears on (i.e., can be read from) `fildes[0]`. This allows the output of one program to be sent to another program: the source's standard output is set up to be the write end of the pipe; the sink's standard input is set up to be the read end of the pipe. The pipe itself persists until all of its associated descriptors are closed.

A pipe whose read or write end has been closed is considered widowed. Writing on such a pipe causes the writing process to receive a `SIGPIPE` signal. Widowing a pipe is the only way to deliver end-of-file to a reader: after the reader consumes any buffered data, reading a widowed pipe returns a zero count.

On successful creation of the pipe, `0` is returned. Otherwise, a value of `-1` is returned and the variable `errno` set to indicate the error.

[pipe-example.c](https://www.teach.cs.toronto.edu/~ajr/209/notes/procfiles/pipe-example.c)

---
#### Signals
Signals are a mechanism that allows a process or the operating system to interrupt a currently running process and notify it that an event has occurred.

Each signal is identified by a number between 1 and 31, and defined constants are used to give them names. Each signal is associated with a default action that the process receiving the signal will normally perform when it receives the signal.

The `kill` function can be used to send signals to processes. To do so, we need to know the PID of the process.

The `sigaction` function can be used to modify the signal table so that the programmer-defined function is called instead of the default action.

`int sigaction(int sig, const struct sigaction *restrict act, struct sigaction *restrict oact);`
The first argument is the number of the signal that is to be modified. The second argument is a pointer to struct that we need to initialise before we call `sigaction`. The third argument is also a pointer to a struct, but in this case the system call fills in the values of the struct with the current state of the signal handler before it is changed.

Refer to `man signal` for a list of signals.

---
#### Concurrency
#todo 

---
#### Sockets
#todo 

---
